In late 2010, I returned to the United States after two years of teaching English in Poland and South Korea.  I had recently decided that I wanted to pursue a PhD in computational neuroscience, and knew that I needed to build research experience and basic coursework in my field of interest.  After spending the first half of 2011 taking foundational computer science courses, in the fall of 2011 I applied to an MS program in Bioinformatics.  I was ready to begin research.

I began by contacting Dr. Giorgio Ascoli, a pioneer in the field of neuroinformatics.  He invited me to attend a research meeting on "The Hippocampome", a project to construct a web-accessible knowledge base of all known neuron types in the rodent hippocampus.  The guiding light of this daunting task is the use of the assembled data for a full-scale computational model.  The neuron classification philosophy prioritizes the axo-dendritic patterning of neurons; this knowledge allows the determination of which other neuron classes a particular class might communicate with, laying the foundation for an algorithm to build a model via the stochastic generation of connections.  An essential input to the model-generating algorithm is the population size (count) of each neuron class.  The project did not have anybody working on this issue at the time-- the team's manpower was consumed by neuron morphology, molecular marker expresion, and electrophysiology.  So, after I'd played the wallflower at several meetings, Dr. Ascoli asked me to think about how to obtain the neuron counts.  He scheduled a meeting for next week.  The attendees would be Diek (the post-doc project lead), himself, and me.

Hoping to impress, I put together an extraordinarily verbose, small-print, equation-heavy document laying out a plan for estimating the counts using matrix algebra.  I proudly sent it out to Diek and Dr. Ascoli the day before the meeting.  The next day, I nervously entered Dr. Ascoli's office and was greeted with an amused glance.  Diek was already seated at the conference table.  I sat, and Dr. Ascoli spoke: "Thank you for... this" he said, gesturing to a printed copy of my document. My palms were sweaty.  Diek snorted: "What?  You mean the 8-page document?  I had a look, but it's all based on random sampling, and we don't have that."  Dr. Ascoli glanced at me and lifted the document, hefting its pages.  "I think maybe this needs a... cheat sheet."  I nodded.  He then turned and tossed the paper onto a side table covered with other thick packets in small print.  It might as well have been the mouth of the Leviathan.  I kissed any hope of a thorough reading of my work goodbye.  Thus began my education.

Over the past year I've learned many more lessons in communication and practicality.  Twice-weekly meetings and regular progress reports have had a wonderfully clarifying effect on my work.  During this time, my core responsibility has been the estimation of the neuron counts, but I've also contributed coding work to other parts of the project.  The volume and variability of the Hippocampome data— ~110 cell types each with its own complex set of names, properties, and supporting evidence for those properties— has driven me to develop a wide repertoire of scripting and data manipulation skills.  The complex and fuzzy quality of the data has instilled in me an appreciation for the messiness of real research.  And the algorithms and methods of inference I’ve explored have given me my first taste of applying quantitative analysis to a real scientific problem.

My work on neuron counts began with mining the literature.  I needed to extract any available empirical data that either reported a neuron count directly or might help in estimating one.  The reading was difficult, but the extraction and organization of the data was worse.  How was I going to remember the important parts of a paper when I returned to it in several months?  How was I going to share this information with my teammates?  How many times did each paper need to be reread before I could declare it fully mined?  And how could I keep track of all the bits of information with the associated metadata of species and experimental protocol?  I found myself spending grueling hours copying and pasting quotes from PDFs, dragging files into folders, and correcting Excel's irritating tendency to format ISBN numbers in scientific notation.

Such miseries of data manipulation deserve 80% of the credit for the programming skills I wield today.  I learned to use PubMed's API to automatically pull bibliographic data.  I wrote command-line interfaces to streamline the process of data-entry and provide access to a library of spreadsheet processing scripts.  I developed a simple language for representing my data in a text file, and wrote a parser to split the contents of the file into multiple spreadsheets.  Pained by the juggling of many Excel files on a slow computer, I experimented with databases for storing and searching the collected data.  

This determination to perform routine tasks in an efficient, future-friendly way paid off.  By the time May 2012 rolled around, the project was beginning to enter a crunch-- it would have its first public unveiling at a conference in the fall, and we needed an operational web portal.  But we had a problem. Our lead software developer had a new, full-time job that was soaking up 90% of his working hours.  Luckily, the skills I'd developed over the preceding months allowed me to step into his shoes.  I expanded his early database design and handled the mapping of all of our spreadsheet data into the database.  In the weeks immediately preceding the conference, I began working with the PHP, CSS, and HTML aspects of the portal as well.

In recent months, I have returned my focus to the neuron counts.  It has become my MS thesis.  I now have the technical skills to do the work much more smoothly, and it is beginning to mature.  Thus far, a set of preliminary count estimates have been generated using data on molecular marker expression, morphologically classified cells sampled from hippocampal subregions, and published estimates of volume and total number of GABAergic and glutamatergic cells in various layers.  Currently I am working on representing all known constraints on class counts as equations, and applying an optimization algorithm to these equations-- this should yield count estimates that minimize distance from the constraints.  In the spring, I hope to submit this work for publication.

In summary, my experience in Dr. Ascoli's lab has been the crown jewel of my education. It has changed my life and made me absolutely certain of my desire to work in neuroscience research.
